Program Guide
Computer Science, BA
College: Arts and Sciences
Degree: BA in Computer Science
Specialized Admission: No

Contact: Sue Jung (Main campus)
Address: 203E Love Building Tallahassee, FL 32306-4530
Email: cs-advisors@fsu.eduContact: Distance Learning - FSU Panama City Advising
Address: C117 Holley Academic Center, Panama City, FL 32405
Phone: (850) 770-2288
Email: advising@pc.fsu.edu
 

Description of Major
**Please Note: Face-to-face/in-person instruction of this program is available ONLY at the main campus in Tallahassee, FL. However, it is available via Online/Distance Learning to all FSU students via the Panama City, FL campus.*

This major provides a broad-based background sufficient for entry to a career in computing. It provides a systems view of computing, emphasizing the interdependence of design, object orientation, and distributed systems and networks, from basic software through systems design. This major develops core competencies in programming, database structure, computer organization, and operating systems. It allows opportunities to study a range of other aspects of computer and information science, such as information security, data communication/ networks, computer and network systems administration, theoretical computer science, and software engineering. Every student can expect to become proficient at programming in C , C++, and Assembly Language. Additionally, students will be exposed to other languages such as Java, C#, Ada, Lisp, Scheme, Prolog, Perl, and HTML. This major is available on campus or through Distance Learning.

The CS/BA program is intended to allow students flexibility in combining computing with other interests. The BA program requires 9 hours of humanities/history beyond General Education requirements. Students in this program should meet with an advisor to select a minor from an approved list. The CS/BA is not ABET/CAC accredited and is not intended to provide sufficient preparation in computer science theory for graduate work in computer science.

Note to prospective transfer students: Prospective transfer students should contact as-admissions@fsu.edu (Arts & Sciences Admissions) with specific questions about admission and mapping requirements.

Internet Supported Distance Learning
The programs available through internet-supported distance learning are degree programs that enable students with an Associate in Arts (A.A.) degree from a Florida public institution to earn an FSU bachelor’s degree without moving to Tallahassee. The programs are designed for part time study. Each student receives access to a course Web site and the e-mail addresses of everyone associated with the class. A unique feature of the distance learning programs is the support FSU provides through an assigned Mentor. Mentors serve as learning guides, helping to facilitate each individual student’s success. Students interact with each other, their Mentors, and their instructors via e-mail, Web-based discussion pages, and telephone calls. Students interested in Distance Learning should contact the Office of Distance Learning (ODL). For more information contact (877) FLSTATE or visit the web at https://distance.fsu.edu .

Prerequisite Coursework
MAC X140 (3) Precalculus Algebra
MAC X114 (3) Trigonometry
MAC X311 (4) Calculus I

Note: State-wide common prerequisites are always under review. For the most current information and for acceptable alternative courses, visit the “Common Prerequisites Manual.” This is available from the “Student Services” section of http://www.flvc.org .

Requirements
Requirements for graduation in the College of Arts and Sciences include:
The College of Arts and Science requires proficiency in a foreign language through the intermediate (2220 or equivalent) level or sign language through the advanced (2614 or equivalent) level. Foreign language courses are not available via distance learning at FSU.

Admissions/Continuation Requirements to the Major Program of Studies
Students should complete the prerequisite coursework with a grade of C minus or higher to be considered for entrance to the major program of study. Students must also have completed a minimum of 52 hours of credit and at least half the required hours in General Education requirements, including required two English and two mathematics, or an A.A degree.

Distance Learning students must complete the A.A. from a Florida public institution, required prerequisites, and a Supplemental Admissions Application prior to admission. Distance Learning students should also complete the oral competency requirement and the College of Arts and Sciences foreign language requirement prior to admissions. In accordance with the University residency rule, degree requirements not available online must be completed prior to the final 30 hours of the degree.

All State Common Program Prerequisites listed as Term 1-4 milestones must be completed with a "C" range (C minus, C, or C+) grade or better. Students earning less than the necessary grade in any of these courses will be required to retake those courses until the standard is met.

Note: retaking a course may delay graduation and incur increased fee liability (i.e., repeat course surcharge and excess credit surcharge).

No CGS courses, and no internship courses such as CIS 3943r Internship in Computer Science will count toward the requirements for the Computer Science (BA) major. CIS 3250 cannot count as a CS elective for the Computer Science BA major.

This undergraduate program in computer science has a retention policy:
Upon admission into the program, the student must maintain a 2.50 or higher GPA in courses taken at FSU that are required for the Computer Science major, including core, elective, and collateral courses. Prerequisite courses are excluded from this GPA calculation.

Limit of D or F Grades in Major Courses:

No more than five D or F grades in any CAP#xxx, CDA#xxx, CEN#xxx, CIS#xxx, CNT#xxx, COP#xxx, COT#xxx (3000 or 4000 level) IDC 4140 and IDC 4290, excluding COP 3363, COP 3014, and COP 3353.
MAD 2104
Major Program of Studies at FSU: (51-52 hours)

Computer Science courses: (22-23 hours)
COP 3363 (3) Introduction to C++ for majors OR both COP 3014 (3) Programming I and COP 3353 (1) Introduction to UNIX
COP 3330 (3) Data Structures, Algorithms, and Generic Programming I
CEN 4020 (3) Software Engineering I
CEN 4090L (1) Software Engineering Capstone
CDA 3100 (3) Computer Organization I
COP 4610 (3) Operating Systems & Concurrent Programming
COP 4530 (3) Data Structures, Algorithms, and Generic Programming II
COP 4521 (3) Secure Parallel & Distributed Computing w/ Python

Computer Science electives: (17 hours)
At least seventeen semester hours of computer science electives, at least twelve of which must be at the 4000 level, where up to two hours can be from CIS 4900.

Additional courses required for the BA program in Computer Science: (12 hours)
MAD 2104 (3) Discrete Mathematics I, plus
Nine (9) hours in the fields of humanities and/or history, in addition to the General Education requirements and the Arts and Sciences foreign language requirement.

Minor: CS/BA majors must complete a minimum of 12 hours in an approved minor area.

Digital Literacy: (0 hours beyond major)
COP 3363 (3) Intro to Programming or COP 3014 (3) Programming I meets this requirement.

Oral Communication Competency: (0-3 hours)
Students must demonstrate the ability to orally transmit ideas and information clearly. This requirement is met through a college-level approved course, such as SPC 1017 or SPC 2608 (3). Students taking CIS 3250 or any GE Ethics course may take CIS 3250L (1) Ethics & CS lab to satisfy this requirement.

Minimum Program Requirements ­Summary
Total Hrs. Required 120
General Education 36*
BA Prerequisite Coursework 10*
BA Major Coursework 51-52
Minor Coursework 0-12 or more
Foreign Language 0-12 (depending on placement)
Digital Literacy 0 beyond major
Oral Communication Competency 0-3
Electives to bring total hours to 120

*Note: Some prerequisite coursework may also be applied to General Education requirements in math and science

Mapping
Mapping is FSU’s academic advising and monitoring system. Academic progress is monitored each Fall and Spring semester to ensure that students are on course to earn their degree in a timely fashion. Transfer students must meet mapping guidelines to be accepted into their majors. You may view the map for this major at academic-guide.fsu.edu.

Remarks
1. A minimum of 45 hours at the 3000 level or above, 30 of which must be taken at this University.
2. Half of the major course semester hours must be completed in residence at this University.
3. The final 30 hours must be completed in residence at this University.
4. The B. A. degree requires nine (9) additional hours in the fields of history and humanities.

Employment Information
Salary Information: For more information go to: National Association of Colleges and Employers (www.naceweb.org) or the Occupational Outlook Handbook (www.bls.gov/ooh/home.htm) provided by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Representative Job Titles Related to this Major: Programmer (Scientific, Business, Systems), Technical Writer, Systems Analyst, Operations-Research analyst, Software Engineer, Webmaster, Teacher of High School, Technical support Representative, Manager, Data Processing System Manager, Network Administrator, Sales Representative for Computer or Software Manufacturers.

Representative Employers: Computer Firms, High Schools, Colleges and Universities, Financial Firms, Private Industry, Governmental Agencies.